[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Once again, we
have one of Gaia's very favorite
guests with us, Jerry Wills.
Aside from the incredible story
of Jerry's early start in life
and healing abilities,
he has spent years
researching some of the Earth's
anomalies, along with his wife
Kathy, researcher
extraordinaire.
In today's show, we will look
at the American Southwest
and treasure that was spirited
away more than 100 years ago
by the Smithsonian and others,
never to be seen again.
That just ticks me off.
[LAUGHING] It still does.
I first learned about
that about 15 years ago,
and since then,
I've been wanting
to talk to you about it,
because you spent a lot of years
researching this particular
event, and Kathy.
She is your go-to research gal.
She's amazing.
>>JERRY WILLS: She's the person
who answers the questions when
they're asked.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>WILLS: Between
the two of us, we
go places and look
into these things
and try to come up with
tangible pieces of information
so that we can present
it to other people.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's important,
because you put pieces
together, you can connect
dots, you see things.
Kathy is going through the
archives, she is saying,
eh, could be this, could be
that, that doesn't hold water;
bingo, I think we
found something.
And you two are really
an extraordinary pair.
>>WILLS: Well, and it's why
we created Xpeditions TV.
Because we felt that
if we could come across
with information that is based
upon the details that we find
and not necessarily just
based upon conjecture
or some piece of information
that couldn't be validated--
>>REGINA: Well, so
many people do that
and get all excited with one
tiny little piece of evidence
and then, throughout
history, build whole stories
around one piece of
evidence that might even
be subjective to begin with.
>>WILLS: Yeah, exactly.
>>REGINA: And so it discredits
a lot of these subjects.
>>WILLS: Well, of
course we get excited
when we come across a little
piece of information as well.
>>REGINA: Of, course.
>>WILLS: I mean, who wouldn't?
>>REGINA: But you still have
to go further to validate it.
>>WILLS: But, yeah.
I mean, there's so much more.
Because each piece
leads to the next part.
And what Kathy has
done is nothing short
of miraculous in piecing
together all of this.
She has figured things out.
I mean, what we're going
to talk about today,
she researched archives
for nearly four years.
And that's every
day, hours every day,
digging into places that most
people never think to dig
and following leads.
This article relates
to that article,
and someone wrote
something back in the 1700s
that here's an archive of it.
She'd read the whole thing.
And buried in there was a
little piece of information
that led her to the next
thing she should look for.
>>REGINA: Yes.
But just to say this, too,
you guys are a total team,
but she's a little
on the shy side.
When we're all together off
camera, you'll be talking,
and you're there,
and you're present,
and you're the raconteur,
you're comfortable.
And Kathy will be
saying, don't forget
about this that happened.
She'll kind of look away.
So she's a little
camera shy, so you're
the spokesperson for both
of you in these endeavors.
>>WILLS: Well, the information
I'm going to bring to you today
I think is going
to be fascinating.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's a story
I've been long fascinated with,
but I don't have
a Kathy in my life
to put the pieces
together, which
is why I'm happy you're here.
>>WILLS: Good.
>>REGINA: Let's start
from the beginning,
because we're talking about
riches from past times
that aren't known of exactly.
We don't-- we have a very rough
sketch of what the American
Southwest is all about.
We think there were native
societies living there,
everyone was peaceful,
buffalo was plentiful.
And then you had the
white man come across
and do what they did,
and very disrespectfully
so, and that's the end of story.
There's the West.
But there are layers and layers
of antiquities and history
that go probably hundreds of
thousands, if not millions,
of years prior to that
little, tiny story.
And we're going to
dig into some that
have to do with sophisticated,
modern-type treasure from very
ancient times.
>>WILLS: Yeah, of course.
I think what we're going
to be talking about,
so your viewers will
understand, of course,
is this mythological story of a
lost city in the Grand Canyon.
>>REGINA: And its booty.
>>WILLS: And its booty.
And how for decades, many
decades, perhaps even up
to 100 years, it was considered
to be just a tall tale, kind
of like an April
Fool's Day joke,
that was put into the newspaper.
And no one past a
point really gave it
any thought as being a real
thing, because after all, there
was one story.
That's the all and end of it.
Well, we had come
across this story.
And Kathy said, we need to find
out if this is real or not.
And I said, why?
She said, well,
because if it's real,
it leads to something else.
She says, look
what I found here.
So I took at look, and
what she had discovered
was in an ancient
manuscript-- she had already
started researching this.
She'd found an
ancient manuscript
from Asia that talked about
a pilgrimage that was taking
place for many, many years.
I don't know for how many.
But they were coming
from Asia, and they
were going to a place
called the Canyon of Light
to see the Child of the Sun.
She said, what if it's this?
Well, that's intriguing,
because I didn't even
give a thought to people
from Asia making a trip
to someplace call the
Canyon of Light that
would be across the ocean.
And it wouldn't be
until many years later
we actually found evidence
that this was indeed
what was happening.
Well, as she started
digging into this research,
she discovered that there
was a newspaper article that
was supposed to
relate to the story
that everyone was familiar with.
>>REGINA: Right.
The 1909 one from "The Gazette."
>>WILLS: Yeah.
And of course, that
story says that they're
basically picking it
up from the last thing
that they reported on.
I forgot exactly how
they phrased this,
but she says there's going to be
this other-- if this is real--
>>REGINA: There's
another report.
>>WILLS: So she started looking.
Eventually she found
her way into archives,
and there were no references
in any of the archives
she looked in.
It's as though that was never
printed, it was never done,
and it didn't make any sense.
Why would they say this?
It wouldn't be for another year
and a half, maybe two years,
that she discovered that there
was a private collection,
and in the private collection,
this was in that archive.
But it had been taken out
of all the other archives.
>>REGINA: This article.
>>WILLS: This one article.
>>REGINA: Yes.
It is just one from
the "Yuma Gazette?"
Because the one
that we read later
was from the Phoenix paper.
>>WILLS: Right.
>>REGINA: Right, OK.
So this the "Yuma
Gazette" preceded it.
>>WILLS: So that was startling.
How do you explain that,
that all the public archives,
this article is not in it?
But only one existing
archive it was in.
So we made a photocopy of it.
And we had been
telling people what
we were doing, keeping them
up to date, as we always
do with Xpeditions TV.
And we put it up
on the internet.
Here you go, folks.
Here's the missing piece that
everyone said didn't exist.
>>REGINA: The first report of
the discovery of this bounty.
>>WILLS: Mhm.
And what that first report
said was intriguing,
because it refers to
this fellow, GC Kincaid.
He had emerged from the Grand
Canyon, come down the Colorado
River, exited at Yuma.
And he had thousands,
hundreds or thousands--
I don't recall now--
but a great number
of photographic plates of
what he had taken pictures of.
And he was having this
one agency there in Yuma
process all the photography.
He had been using the latest
state-of-the-art Kodak camera.
And as a result,
an expedition was
being formed to go
back because he'd
found a lost city
in the Grand Canyon
that was suspected
as being Egyptian.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Now that's where everyone else
has picked up on that story.
Now, he was not just
a random adventurer.
He was the son of a Mason.
He was well-equipped.
He was monied for
this adventure.
>>WILLS: And that's
where it starts
getting quite intriguing.
Why was GC Kincaid in there
with a bunch of cameras?
And how would he know
where to go and look?
>>REGINA: This is not
an accessible area.
>>WILLS: Well, we've been the
Grand Canyon many times looking
for is place over the
course of almost four years.
And I can tell you
that this is some
of the most dangerous,
treacherous terrain you've ever
seen.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WILLS: Well, we started
asking these questions.
Kathy asked them.
So she says, I've got to
find out who Kincaid is.
Found out that he's
from Idaho, and he
was one of the best known, most
talented trackers, explorers,
hunters, survivalists
of that age.
But why was he picked?
Well, how did they
even know about him?
Well, she found that
information as well.
As it turns out,
there's a fellow
named John Wesley Powell.
And Powell had gone into the
Grand Canyon ahead of Kincaid.
Powell had lost one of
his arms in the Civil War.
And he was now-- what was he?
She could tell you--
something with the Interior.
>>REGINA: With the
Department of the Interior?
>>WILLS: Right.
And I think he was the
person in charge of that.
Well, he had gone
into the Grand Canyon
very specifically, taking
his time, going through.
And in his journal,
it talks about how
he had be rescued off
of cliffs because he
was climbing way up on cliffs.
>>REGINA: Well, if
he's missing an arm--
>>WILLS: With one arm.
>>REGINA: How is that possible?
>>WILLS: It was like he
was looking for something.
But they never figured out
what he was looking for.
And he eventually
exited the Grand Canyon,
and that's the end of that.
Then here you have
Kincaid coming down, going
to the same places Powell
went, and he found something.
So then you have
to ask yourself,
why was Powell there
looking for something?
Because it was really clear that
he was looking for something.
>>REGINA: So now that
gets into the back story
of why the search, why
the journey westward
to begin with to
this fable of riches.
>>WILLS: Exactly.
And this is where she uncovered
just an amazing wealth
of detail.
It takes us back into Europe.
And in Europe, you have
kings and nobility,
sometimes very rich people
who share some kind of title.
But these are
well-educated people.
They are taught
to read and write.
They went to universities.
They were taught.
But by and large, most
of the common people
didn't know how
to read or write.
They basically were a workforce,
surviving as best they could.
But the nobility had access to
things that were passed down
generation to generation.
If there were wars, whoever
conquered got their information
and made it their own.
Eventually, some
of this information
fell into the hands
of England and Spain
and France, too,
I would presume.
>>REGINA: Well, and they
have their own lineages
that had protected Masonic,
Templar, and other,
more ancient knowledge.
>>WILLS: Sure.
And of course, you
remember the Templars.
They were in France.
And they escaped out
of there and went
to England and other places.
>>REGINA: Portugal.
>>WILLS: And then they
amassed an amazing amount
of information.
This information wasn't
just your ordinary type.
It dealt with a world
that was totally
a different world than anything
that we've ever known existed.
There were maps
and other documents
that supported that
somewhere else on the face
the Earth there was a
civilization in another part
of the world that was vast
and advanced and very capable.
So take it a little bit
farther now in time,
and you have Spain
coming over here.
And what is Spain doing?
They're going, looking for
gold, looking for treasure.
They're going all over
the Southwest trying
to find something.
They never found it.
They found bits and
pieces, but they never
found what they
were looking for.
Bring us a little
bit farther forward,
the Americas occur, and
you have England at war
with the Americas for
the Revolutionary War.
And then you have
the War of 1812
and all of these
things taking place.
There were pieces of history
that occurred during that time
that we're not really aware of.
Some people are.
Maybe some your viewers are
aware of it, but by and large,
most people aren't.
For example, the War
of 1812, what we found
is that the United States
lost that war to England.
It was bankrupt.
The White House is burned down.
That's part of public
knowledge, historical knowledge.
But what happened
next maybe isn't.
And that is because England
came and said, look,
we don't want to ruin you guys.
How about if we give you a bunch
of money, get started again.
There are things we need.
England was at war with everyone
all over the face the world,
and they needed supplies.
They needed--
>>REGINA: A workforce.
>>WILLS: A workforce.
The Americas had that.
>>REGINA: For goods, mhm.
>>WILLS: They had the people in
the South, people in the North,
all this stuff going on.
>>REGINA: We were a
very industrious country
in the early years.
>>WILLS: Yeah, we were.
So they said, we'll
give you a loan,
get yourself back
on your feed again,
and you can pay
us back the loan.
But they made things such that
it could never be paid back.
Well, take us a little bit
farther forward in time.
What you have now is you
have the South and the North.
And the South is going, hey,
we're supplying all these goods
to the North.
We're getting pennies
on the dollar.
They're selling it to
England for a lot more
than we were getting.
Why is it, when we could be
making these things as well?
Why is this happening?
They didn't understand that
there was an agreement made,
and they had to do that.
For all they knew, they
were just basically being
taken advantage of.
So they said, look,
we don't like this.
And of course,
there was slavery,
and there were people on both
sides of the fence with that.
So England says,
you know something?
Because they're starting
to think, hm, maybe
we should have kept this place.
They said, you know something?
You really shouldn't be
taking that from them.
What you should be doing
is doing it yourself
and selling it directly to us.
They're selling us guns and
cannons and gun powder and all
this stuff, and you could
be doing the textiles.
You're really set up for it.
And they're going, yeah,
that's a good idea.
But we don't have enough money.
We want to secede.
And they're going,
well, then you should.
Change is good.
>>REGINA: I'm sure there was a
little more dialogue than that,
but thank you for
reducing it for us.
Of course, change is good.
>>WILLS: And they go,
well, you're right.
Change is good.
So let's secede.
So they all get together
and talk about it.
Everybody says, grand idea.
Because they're
all quite wealthy.
I mean, they have
big plantations.
It's not that they're broke.
But they could be a lot
more wealthy if they were
controlling their own destiny.
So let's make our own country.
They go and try to do this,
make the announcement,
and just before they make the
announcement, England says,
look, we want to make sure
that you guys are going to win,
and it'll be just fine.
Let's put this big chunk of
money in the Bank of Virginia.
And that way, you've got
some operating capital.
So they did.
And the South is
going, that's good.
OK, let's go, boys.
Let's go, y'all.
And they announced it.
They're going to secede.
There's going to be a war.
And all this is coming
into a very fine point,
and it isn't good.
And as things get to that
critical moment where there's
no turning back, it's going to
happen, it's a matter of God,
country, and honor, England
goes to the Bank of Virginia
and promptly takes all
their money out and says,
eh, we changed our mind.
And the South is like,
oh, that's not good.
We're going to have to
use all of our own money.
Let's still do it.
And it ends up rather
disaster-oriented.
It was is a very bad thing
that happened to this country.
Well, at the end of the
Civil War-- because you see,
Lincoln already knew
this was going on.
He knew it was happening.
And he's like, we can't let
them burn down-- because England
is going to come in here.
There's going to be bad
trouble for all this.
We can't let them destroy
the White House again.
The seat of power
can't be overwhelmed.
It's right here on the ocean.
England has got this massive,
ocean-going warship force.
Let's move the capital
someplace else.
Let's move it to where
the seat of power
was for those who originally
were in the Americas.
Well the backstory
that's happening here,
if you can follow this, is
that while all this is going on
with the Civil War, there's
some guys over in the Arizona
Territory.
And they don't want any
part of all that stuff.
They're too far away
from it for it to matter.
They're busy being
ranchers and whatever
they were, prospectors.
And they find in this
Paiute Indian settlement,
this woman had been
attacked by a cougar.
And of course, they
had some medicine.
They knew what to do.
They'd been surviving the
wilderness for all this time.
And so they saved her life.
Turns out to be the
wife of the chief.
And the chief is like,
you guys are pretty nice.
I like what you've done.
Don't like white men.
So I'll tell you what.
I'll give you a
bunch of gold since I
know you're looking for it.
And take as much as you can
carry, but don't come back.
We'll kill you.
>>REGINA: Because their culture
had really very little use
for it other than to
bargain for something.
They were living on the land.
>>WILLS: Right.
Well, in their philosophy this
was in the city of the dead.
They're not gonna go in there.
>>REGINA: Yeah, right.
>>WILLS: The cave
is right there.
Go in and get some stuff and
leave, but don't come back.
Well, they did.
All this is going on
on the East coast,
and these guys are over here
in the Arizona territories,
kind of the western side.
They show up in Salt Lake City
with these magnificent pieces
of gold, these artifacts.
And of course, it gets
telegraphed back to Washington,
because there's this thing
they're wanting to find out.
If anybody comes up
with stuff like this,
we need to know about it.
>>REGINA: Because are
trying to essentially boost
their treasury.
>>WILLS: That, and they're also
privy to the information that
they were able to get--
>>REGINA: From their own
bloodlines or whatnot,
that there was something here.
>>WILLS: Right, and if you find
it, you're king of the world.
So telegraph, the message goes.
These guys brought
in these things,
never seen anything
like it before.
Next thing you know, all this
is going on with the war.
War shuts down, and John
Wesley Powell shows up.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
the Golden Capstone Project
and where that fit in.
>>WILLS: Well, at the
end of the Civil War,
Lincoln is thinking to
himself, this isn't good.
Because he's now said that
he's going to break away
from House of McGregor,
which are the Masons,
form his own Masonic
order in the Americans.
That didn't go over very well
with anybody, except the people
here.
And to make it
even more powerful,
he's moving the capital over
somewhere in the Southwest.
It really wasn't that
clear, as I recall.
Kathy found these documents.
It's not just conjecture.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>WILLS: The next thing you
know, it's called the Golden
Capstone Project.
>>REGINA: Capstone, of course
important in the Masonic order.
>>WILLS: And of course,
as everyone knows, as soon
as Lincoln signs this order,
we know that happened,
but everyone knows that
Lincoln was assassinated.
>>REGINA: What was
the proximity in time?
>>WILLS: Oh, within days.
>>REGINA: He signs the
order, and he's dead.
OK.
>>WILLS: So it all went
down very, very rapidly.
And of course, everyone
has their own idea
why he was assassinated.
It could be this,
that, or the other.
We don't know why it happened.
But we know that these
events took place.
So that's why they were
going in and taking a look.
John Wesley Powell
is going and looking
because these two
brothers reported
where they got it
from in general terms,
because he went and found them.
And they told him, and
so they're going back,
and Wesley Powell is going
back to look for this location.
He can't get to it.
So he finds someone else, and
that's how GC Kincaid shows up.
>>REGINA: OK, so he has
discovered this place.
How did he get access to it?
Because this is almost a
couple thousand-foot drop-off
with an opening
that would seem, I
mean, even with
repelling-- I guess
with the most
sophisticated repelling
gear you could get in, but
you can't get anything out
of there.
So how did that happen.
>>WILLS: Well,
let's take a moment
and examine what this place
was before it changed.
What we have here is
a place in the canyon
called [? Quagid ?] Falls.
It at one time had been
a dam, a natural dam.
Two volcanoes went off and
filled in the Grand Canyon,
creating a natural dam.
This, in turn, caused
a big lake, kind
of like Lake Powell is now.
And these people
who were in there,
we don't know when
they went there.
We don't know what
that story is.
All we know is that there were
Asians coming across, going up
the Colorado River,
getting to his dam,
climbing up, getting into
boats, and going across
to the entrance of
this underground city.
And they called it
the City of Light.
They were going there to pay
homage to the child of the sun.
We don't know who that
is, what that means.
So we have those
events going on,
and now you have Powell and
Kincaid having gone there
two different times in history.
And this dam has broken.
>>REGINA: Right.
That's the key part.
>>WILLS: So the water level
is not at 1,800 feet high.
>>REGINA: OK, can I
insert a story here?
Don't forget where you are.
I don't even know
if I'm supposed
to be talking about it.
It was a documentary I was
going to do 10 years ago.
>>WILLS: I won't tell anyone.
>>REGINA: Thank you.
Sh.
>>WILLS: Quiet.
>>REGINA: And I won't get
into details just in case,
but-- well, a little bit.
It was called "The Mystery
of the Cliff Dwellers,"
That's what the documentary
for PBS would have been.
A man who work for NASA and had
access to all satellite imagery
and was an extreme climber
and spelunker and such
in the Southwest as
well made a discovery.
And the only question
was the timing on it.
That was all a vast, inland
sea, as little as 800 years ago.
>>WILLS: Oh, he found
evidence of this.
>>REGINA: And there
was a fracture,
which created what became the
fracture down the Grand Canyon.
>>WILLS: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And so he was saying,
these cliff dwellings, Chaco
Canyon, all these
different mysteries
are easily solved when you
realize that was just a launch
point for boats, or
that was a launch point
to get out of your canoe
and go into your home,
that these were at sea level.
And I'm just saying that
to validate your point.
And he proved it out.
>>WILLS: Yeah, and
those ones you're
talking about around the
Colorado Plateau, as I recall,
there were three lakes there.
There was another,
much larger lake
called Lake Bonneville that
was up in the Utah Territories,
which--
>>REGINA: Right,
Bonneville Flats.
>>WILLS: --is now
Bonneville Flats,
but there were cities around the
perimeter of Lake Bonneville.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
there are all kinds,
and I won't go into
all the anomalies.
Maybe I'll still do the
documentary one day.
So go ahead.
>>WILLS: It would be
very good if you did.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So continue on.
So now they were just
simply able to use
whatever structures they
were in to get into the city.
>>WILLS: Certainly.
I mean, the water level
was 1,800 feet higher
than it is now.
And that's a known thing.
It isn't like speculation.
But there was an earthquake,
this volcanic rock crumbled,
and the water pressure
blew it apart.
And it's now called
[? Quagid ?] Falls.
Well, when Powell went
through and Kincaid followed,
they were looking for
something very specific
just beyond the convergence
of the Colorado and the Little
Colorado.
That was specific.
And [? Quagid ?] Falls is
just downstream from there,
just a few miles, not very far.
The people who were left
in there when that broke--
because there were people in
there when the water level
went down.
And what they had
done, they still
had pilgrims coming there
after this had happened.
So they carved footholds,
handholds, all the way
from the river all the way up.
And the people inside had
access to the surface, which
was another 2,000 feet,
roughly, up to the surface
from inside the city.
Because that's where they
would have their farms.
That's where they would
be growing things.
And they had taken
existing cracks and holes
and embellished them so
they can go up there.
Apparently it's a quite large
environment inside here.
Well, when Kincaid
finds his way there,
he finds those handles and
climbs up and goes inside.
And of course, the rest, as they
say, is the rest of the story,
he went in examining,
finding, documenting,
talking about what he found.
And that's all something that's
part of historical record.
You read about it.
>>REGINA: Right.
So let's talk about once that
information made it back East.
>>WILLS: So when Kincaid came
out of there and let them know,
I found it, I have pictures.
>>REGINA: Where
are those pictures?
>>WILLS: Nobody knows.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>WILLS: Well,
actually, we know.
They are in a vault.
Well, they were
in the Smithsonian Institute.
>>REGINA: Right.
They play largely into this.
So--
>>WILLS: The Smithsons.
>>REGINA: Smithsons.
>>WILLS: England.
>>REGINA: England.
Let's talk about who the
Smithsons were and then what
happened when the Smithsonian
got the scent of that trail.
>>WILLS: Well, I don't really
know who the Smithsons were
specifically.
I speculate that they must
have been quite wealthy,
somehow connected to the crown.
And remember, the
crown is not the queen.
The crown is the city,
this corporation.
>>REGINA: City of London.
>>WILLS: Mhm.
So you've got these
folks from England
with a lot of money
and influence,
who are somehow now
involved with this project.
And you have someone in this
remote place, the Arizona
Territory, Yuma, of all places.
How far away from anywhere
is that from New York?
>>REGINA: Right.
Even today. [CHUCKLING]
>>WILLS: Even today.
But back then, if
you were to go there,
it might take you
a month traveling.
But what happened next
was just remarkable.
As soon as it's known,
within two weeks
an expeditionary
force has assembled
at the edge of the
Grand Canyon and is
ready to do whatever they need
to do to get inside there.
And this was
engineers, laborers,
scientists of the time.
And they were all being paid
by the Smithsonian Institute.
And then 27 years goes by.
First it started out
with horse-drawn wagons
and then a light rail
system of some sort.
It doesn't exist
there any longer.
But we know that
this was the case
because when you use infrared
satellite imagery and look,
you can still see the evidence
of these lines and these tracks
and where it started
where it went.
This is how we were able to
determine where their base
camp was, where their
point of the embarkation
would be to go down the canyon.
Because really, getting
anything out of the canyon
is impossible.
You can't go upstream.
You can't go downstream
with any ease.
The only way to do it
is to go over the edge.
But the only way to
successfully go over the edge
is to have plateaued
areas like stair steps
where you bring it up,
bring it up, bring it up.
And the last one would be
a hellish drop-off anyway.
But we found it.
We found where they had
mounted their equipment, where
they had established their lines
of taking things in and out.
And then we started looking
a little bit more deeply,
because surely,
you think about it,
people go to a place like
that, they have trash.
They can't help it.
They're going to have trash.
Bottles are going
to break, people
are going to drop a coin
out of their pocket.
So we started looking more
closely, just checking,
no digging, just checking and
finding things on the surface.
And what we found were some
rather unusual and very old
pieces.
And why would they be there?
One of the things that if
I remember this correctly,
it seems like it was Kincaid
that lost one of his oars
during his journey
down the canyon.
It was either Kincaid or Powell.
I don't recall which.
This is where Kathy comes in
handy, because she knows this.
We found an oar kind of buried
under some brush in the sand
from that era.
Someone had found
it, apparently,
and just left it there,
thought they'd have a souvenir
and must have forgotten it.
We found broken bottles from
that era, all these things.
But what did they find?
Well, of course the pictures
would have told the story.
We can only guess
from what Kincaid said
that he had seen inside there.
>>REGINA: And now let's
start talking about that.
>>WILLS: Well, a foundry
where apparently metals
were being smelted down.
>>REGINA: Precious
metals and semi-precious.
>>WILLS: Mhm.
Living quarters for all of
these people, the statuary.
But that's where it
gets a little strange,
because the statuary had
nothing to do with Egyptians.
>>REGINA: Even though
there were sarcophagi.
>>WILLS: There were.
But Egyptians
weren't the only ones
to wrap people up in
mummies, and especially 8-
and 12-foot tall
mummies lined up
on walls inside
of a large cavern.
No, the type of
statuary they found
in there were the
same sort of things
that you would expect to
find if you went to Asia,
the same kind of abstract
gods and goddesses
that you would find over there,
statues with the lotus design
and statues with--
it wasn't like it
was any one particular culture.
Apparently there were several
cultures represented, even
cultures going into the
Indian culture and Angkor Wat
and that sort of thing,
this whole menagerie of--
>>REGINA: Asiatic thing.
>>WILLS: Asiatic
things inside there.
>>REGINA: OK.
I want to just add
something at this point,
too, because you and I both
know-- we've met this person.
There was a man who was also
an explorer in modern times,
taking people through there,
took a lot of photographs.
And he had discovered some of
the clay burial tombs of some
of these people in Arizona.
And again, just overlaying
what you were saying,
I saw the pictures
of them, and they
were shocking and
extraordinary, because these
were the-- we call them giants.
They were between 9 and 14
feet tall or 15 feet tall.
>>WILLS: They were quite large.
>>REGINA: And with red hair and
very surprising clothing on,
just shocking clothing.
I mean, that's
the ones they call
kind of zoot suits
in proximity to this.
So now, he was
threatened, and I want
to talk about that in
a little bit with you.
He was threatened,
and when I was
about to do an interview
with him, he finally said,
I can't do it.
I'm afraid.
>>WILLS: Yeah, it's a little
scary talking about that stuff.
>>REGINA: Mhm.
So OK, while you're
exploring this,
maybe add your
little piece of that.
I'm just validating the photos I
saw of these giants, which I've
never seen anywhere else or
again except his little slide
show for a few people.
>>WILLS: These people,
whoever they were,
who were in the Grand Canyon,
were not the first inhabitants
of that region.
Right off of the Grand Canyon
is a place called Marble Canyon.
And it's replete with giants
and the lure of giants
and its own unique mysteries
that are taking place in there.
>>REGINA: And Richard
Dewhurst is another author
that I've interviewed,
and if anyone
wants to take a look
at that, there's
a lot of representation
of that in that interview,
too, the giants
of North America.
>>WILLS: Well, and Kathy has
uncovered so much about that,
too.
>>REGINA: Mm.
We'll have another
conversation about that,
just the giants alone, then.
OK, go ahead.
>>WILLS: Well, no one
knows what level of things
were taken out of there, but you
figure-- was it 23 or 27 years?
But it was a long
time either way.
And a lot of things
were taken out.
Where did they go?
They went back to England.
That's as far as we've
been able to trace it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, they didn't
end up in the museum.
>>WILLS: Uh-uh.
There were some things that were
taken back to Washington, DC,
to the Smithsonian Institute
there and kept away.
And they are probably
still there, but--
>>REGINA: Mhm.
The majority of them
the research shows
ended up back in England?
Or is that a supposition?
>>WILLS: Well,
that's a supposition,
because we're not sure.
We did find one ship's--
well, Kathy found one
ship's manifest, as I recall.
And it showed that it had
these artifacts on the ship.
And it was headed
back to England.
But then something
happened, and the ship
sank just off of San Francisco.
So we're not sure exactly
what the story is there,
but the ship
apparently did sink.
So who knows what
happened to these things?
The interesting point to
me is that they couldn't
get everything out because there
were some things inside there
that were way too large to
get out through the entrance.
They had been
created inside there,
hewn from solid rock, large
statues, maybe like Angkor Wat.
>>REGINA: Was there a
description of those statutes?
>>WILLS: Oh, there was, yeah.
>>REGINA: And those
are the ones you
say are more like a variety of
East Asiatic gods that had been
worshipped throughout history.
>>WILLS: Yes.
And they couldn't get them out.
So they're still there.
So we decided we would try
to get into this place.
Went and talked with
the Native Americans.
The ones who control
and have dominance
in that particular
area are the Hopi.
And we were already good
friends with the Hopi nation.
Went and spoke with
some of the elders,
and it's like, why do
you want to go there?
That's the City of the Dead.
You shouldn't go there.
Leave them alone.
So we said, well, OK.
That's fine.
But this is also a
place of antiquity,
and we'd like to
know more about it.
So they were like, well, if you
go there, you're on your own.
If you get in trouble,
don't call us.
>>REGINA: Mhm.
Bad juju.
>>WILLS: But if you
want to go, go ahead.
>>REGINA: Ancestors unhappy.
>>WILLS: Yeah.
So one night, we were there
with our research team.
And I think this was like
year two or year three.
And a terrific
storm is blowing up.
There was a storm to the north
and a storm to the south.
Or perhaps it was east and
west, because there, directions
get slightly askew.
But there was a storm on either
side of us, a huge storm.
Lightning is flashing
in the distance
over here and over here.
Wind is blowing from this
direction, then that direction.
In the midst of this becoming
more and more powerful,
lightning dances across
a hillside over here,
and there are these three
figures just standing there.
They must have been
12, 15 feet tall.
You only saw them
during that point
where the lightning was dancing,
and then they were gone.
And we didn't see them again.
But it was like something very,
very strange was going on.
The wind blew so
hard that it nearly
blew us into the Grand Canyon.
It was a very
dangerous situation.
Now I just think about
that and shudder because--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Did you get a sense or feeling
why they showed themselves
to you at that time?
>>WILLS: I think it
was more of a warning.
Stop, don't go any farther.
>>REGINA: OK, now you
got it from the Hopis,
and you got it
from the big guys.
Did you get it from the
government or anyone else?
>>WILLS: No, we didn't When we
were looking for the giants--
because this was a parallel
thing that was going on.
>>REGINA: I see.
Yes, OK.
>>WILLS: We were warned to stop.
Because we had gotten to the
point to where we figured,
look, all we need is a molar
or some of that red hair.
>>REGINA: Kind of like the other
guy we're talking about, yeah.
Stop.
>>WILLS: Just get a DNA sample,
find out who these people were.
It just seems like
a reasonable thing.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>WILLS: And we found where the
giants were-- the same person.
He's the one who told us,
the giants are right here,
I'll take you there, and let's
just find out who they are.
And about two days before
we're ready to go and do that,
a phone call comes in
the middle of the night.
Don't know who it is,
just someone warning us,
don't do this or else.
Well, I'm not one to be
frightened off that easily.
And it's like, or else what?
Um, prison.
We're watching you.
>>REGINA: And that's what
happened to the other guy, too.
>>WILLS: Mhm.
And they knew him and said
they were watching him.
And then it suddenly
all came together.
It's like nothing is worth
taking that kind of risk for.
So forget it.
>>REGINA: OK, now there was
something else, as I recall,
you said.
Now, this is was
in a conversation.
It seems like it
would be relatively
easy to access that city
if you could go down
from above the way they had
come up and down to their crops.
But you couldn't see that.
That wasn't evident
anymore, that opening?
>>WILLS: Well, no.
What they had done is they had
filled these things in back
in the day when they were there.
They were using that to go
down and bring things out,
because when they went
down and went through,
they found, and
came out that way.
They couldn't get things
out very well in those ways,
but this is how they got
up to do their farming.
So to keep people from
getting in there--
because you have to remember
that the Navajo and Hopi were
living there, and they didn't
want them going in there,
so they just filled
these places in.
>>REGINA: They
sealed it off, mhm.
>>WILLS: We know where
those places are.
You can't get into them anymore.
They're just--
>>REGINA: It's full.
It's filled in.
>>WILLS: It is, but you can feel
cold air coming out of there
if you do to the right place.
It's obvious where it is.
You can see it on infrared
satellite photography as well.
>>REGINA: That's what
I was going to ask.
OK.
Well now, OK, let's take a
little sidebar to this story.
How do the Mormons
fit into any of this?
>>WILLS: Oh, this is another
completely interesting aspect
of it, because the Mormons--
and I'm not that up
on their religion to where I
can really talk about it much.
So I'll probably
slaughter that part.
And I apologize to the
Mormon community in advance.
>>REGINA: Well, my understanding
is that Joseph Smith was also
a person in a certain
lineage with a great amount
of knowledge, such as what the
Templars and others possessed.
>>WILLS: Right.
And how he got that
information is real sketchy.
Golden plates, visits with an
angel call Moroni, as I recall.
Well, as far as the
Grand Canyon goes
and the giants and the
ancient lost civilization that
was in that part
of North America,
it all kind of ties in together.
It ties in together also
with some anomalous things
that we found, which I don't
know what to call them.
I mean, it seems trite
to call these portals,
but there are passageways
of some sort that
move through time that are
very old, very ancient.
And I'm speculating, of course.
>>REGINA: Well,
and the Southwest
is known to have
several of these.
>>WILLS: Oh, yeah.
We know.
It's not a question
of, is it real?
We know it's real.
>>REGINA: It's been
written about by
some other anonymous authors.
Mhm.
>>WILLS: And we've
investigated this quite deeply.
But how the Mormon culture fits
into this particular region
is that they know something
was going on there as well.
Now, their idea of
who these people were
and what they were
doing is their own idea.
We don't know who these
people were anyway, really.
>>REGINA: Well,
and they do have--
and I don't know a
lot about Mormonism,
either, so forgive me anyone
who's a Mormon or ex-Mormon,
but it is a much more
cosmically aligned religion.
>>WILLS: But they have
evidence of something
remarkable from
back in the past.
And it isn't evidence of like
things written on the wall
or that sort of-- I mean,
they have tangible things
like gold plates with
inscriptions on them, copper
plates, brass, or bronze, even.
We know of one fellow that
found a cave just stacked full.
It was a huge cavern with
thousands-- not hundreds,
but thousands-- of bronze
plates that were-- what was it?
It was four foot by two
foot by-- what was it?
Eight inches thick.
>>REGINA: It would
take Herculean strength
to move those about.
>>WILLS: And they were stacked
up inside of this cavern.
He thought he'd found gold.
>>REGINA: Right.
Well, now, bronze, as
I recall, was often
found alongside other
of the areas that had
the remains of giants as well.
That was a very prized
and used commodity.
>>WILLS: It was.
So when these Mormon
folks find these things,
they find them
underground always,
inside of caves,
inside of caverns,
going through a tunnel,
and there's a room.
And what I noticed about the
culture in a microcosmic sense
is that there is always
a struggle for power.
There seems to be, anyway,
And you find something like
this, it makes you a prophet
and makes you someone
who's special.
And so you keep a secret, and
you have the piece of power,
and you don't relinquish that.
You don't let anyone
see it or touch it.
But there is those that have let
us see things and touch them.
And for them, it
wasn't about power.
It was about
understanding the past.
Then folks are like, well,
what's written on these plates?
Think of it this way.
If you had a grain
bin and you were
keeping track of who took
what, you would probably put it
on something that would endure.
I don't think that they have
the keys to understanding
the universe on them.
I think there are
probably very mediocre
and common pieces
of information that
were important to the people
then, who's doing what,
here's a laundry list,
that sort of thing.
Now, there probably
are plates that
have some amazing
information on them.
And truly, if you had the
plate and you read it,
it would be amazing information
no matter what's on it.
But we tend to
fantasize and think
they might be something
really, really special.
But I have seen these,
and I'm not so sure
that they're all that special.
Some things are, but not
by and large all of them.
>>REGINA: Record-keeping.
>>WILLS: Yeah, record-keeping
on something that would endure.
>>REGINA: Or was
plentiful, available,
and what you
primarily used anyway.
>>WILLS: Sure.
Exactly right.
But there was something
else going on there, too,
something else that
remains obscure.
The dynamic that
you're looking at here
are ancient civilizations
that go back a very long time.
But you also have some very
strange things with references
to people from the sky.
>>REGINA: OK, that
was my next question.
That's what I was
going to get into.
I've done a couple of
interviews recently
that had to do with underground
civilizations of ETs.
>>WILLS: Well, and I
think that's probably
a safe place for them
to be if they're going
to stay any amount of time.
One of things that
we've not seen
but we had reliable sources,
Native Americans that we know
and we trust, and
they have no reason
to tell us anything,
especially just tell us some--
>>REGINA: Cockamamie story.
>>WILLS: Yeah.
They're telling us about all
these things off in this genre
about ancient cities and
civilizations and da-da-da-da
and places and the
City of the Dead.
But all of a sudden,
you get a story.
Did you know that there's
this egg-shaped thing?
It's a spaceship.
It's caught in this crevice.
And we tried and tried to get it
freed and get it out of there.
It's from ancient times.
And, well, somebody
in the village
talked about it somebody else,
and it got out and went over
here and went over there.
The next thing you
know, the government
shows up with a team of
people on helicopters.
They clear it, pull
it out, take it away.
And we aren't very
happy about it.
Do you know what
that might have been?
I have no idea.
Well, it was a spaceship.
We know that.
Well, how do you know
it was a spaceship?
Because as I got it
loose, it floated.
There are so many references.
And not just in the Southwest.
Go anywhere in the world.
>>REGINA: No, that's true.
And they have their own
names for the star people,
and they align with
them as their ancestors.
And as this other book,
fictionalized work
by Ken Cherry, another
person I interviewed, said,
you can't even calls
them ETs necessarily.
The ones who live
under the Earth
may have been here
longer than humanity.
It's just their domain.
>>WILLS: Well, and I've
got a theory about that.
And I'm sure we'll
get into that.
>>REGINA: Well, we'll get into
that in our next conversation,
you think.
>>WILLS: That sounds
like a good idea.
>>REGINA: Might that
work well there?
>>WILLS: I think so.
Because--
>>REGINA: Because we're
talking anomalies.
>>WILLS: We're talking
huge anomalies.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah, we're about
out of the time, actually.
We'll have to get
on to that in a sec.
>>WILLS: Good heavens.
>>REGINA: Yeah. [LAUGHING]
>>WILLS: Time flies when
you're investigating the past.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHING]
It certainly does.
Well, OK, let's just
hold it right there, OK?
And we're going to come
back for a second hour.
We're gonna take a
little coffee break, OK?
>>WILLS: All right.
>>REGINA: And thank you so much.
As always, I absolutely
am enthralled
listening to the stories.
And they're stories
I'm interested in, too.
And I love the pieces
you bring to the table.
>>WILLS: Well, I hope your
viewers are equally interested.
>>REGINA: Oh, I think
we're all thrilled.
>>WILLS: Super.
>>REGINA: We'll
continue our story
focusing on an
anomalous archway that
appeared to have been a
time portal in times past.
Until then, thank you
for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]